let's bring in Omar Shure uh you're a
professor of security and Military
studies at the Doha Institute for
Graduate Studies om uh as we look back
at day one of this ceasefire and this
prisoner swap agreement between Israel
and Hamas what lessons do you draw from
that well it's very difficult to draw
lessons so far but yeah very early in
this process very early but but there's
good news it did not collapse so far
because you saw the details yesterday
there was so uh multi-dimensions going
on from the Poli iCal to the
communications to the logistics to the
the military side to the repositioning
so there was so many details and there
are we're doing this by uh the
Diplomatic efforts of Qatar and and the
US and Egypt uh and from but from far
you know it's by by Communications there
are no peacekeepers there there's no
Force to really monitor the mediator
Qatar has nobody on the ground yeah yeah
so and and actually no no media as well
so no no the journalists are escorted
but they're not free to uh monitor the
situation in a in any free way so within
this uh OPAC environment you know things
can go wrong very simply so so far uh
there are some violations clearly
especially with shooting at the
Palestinians who were trying to go back
home uh however it's holding uh the the
the first part of the exchange happened
uh yesterday we're seeing now
preparations for the second part so it
seems to me that um it's happening and
and it's not the the the it's not really
the trust between the two sides that's
making happen it's very clever mediation
on one end and a lot of efforts put in
that uh but on the other hand it seems
to me that this is one of the Israeli
operations objectives to to to release
the the hostages and the captives uh and
on the other end also I think Hamas does
not want that that that size of
especially on the civilians you saw
women you saw children probably you
think they don't want to hold as many
captives as they have no they don't want
to because it's a it's a major
responsibility especially on the
civilian side it's also very hard to
it's it will be taking responsibility
for a a larger number in a Warfare situ
in a war situation uh where uh
monitoring them providing security for
them even feeding them is is probably U
an issue so the Lesser they have uh I
think the the
more well it's very hard to use the word
term control but the the the more that
they H they will have control over them
and therefore you know prolong they
would if this deal goes through as it's
currently structured it's it's it's 50
captives that Hamas would have to
release over the course of four days
which would leave them still with 170 to
190 captives I mean that's just an
estimate right um so that's still a lot
of captives for them to be to be
handling especially if the war
resumes um true uh but also it it can
give give a chance for another uh truth
another 4 days uh for of exchanges and
so on I think I don't think the the that
size was by Design uh but it happened
and in a way it's a it's a a check for
Hamas to be able to stop uh and have
some pauses in the fighting while doing
such exchanges uh whether the Israelis
will agree to this this is another issue
because now now they're thinking that
the operation is going relatively well
uh and therefore they want to advance
more and and that that's why they were
resisting U you know having this pause
and it took some significant
International pressures to do so I
looked at the public statements from
both Israel and Hamas and they're saying
they're saying some very similar things
on both sides they're saying that yes we
would like actually and we are willing
to continue the prisoner swap beyond the
four days that are currently agreed and
both sides are saying once this is done
we will resume the war and we will fight
even harder both sides have said that so
if you look at the official statements
it's hard to know really where this is
going so let's let's disregard the
official official statements from both
Israel and Hamas for a moment and maybe
consider what their incentives might be
at the end of the 4-day ceasefire do you
think they are more incentivized to
continue the prisoner swap going
continue the ceasefire going or to go
back to fighting I think it will have to
do with where are we on the fourth day
uh on one end if there are no major uh
violations uh and these exchanges are
well reflected probably for the
Netanyahu government on one end uh but
also for Hamas on the other if this is
going on well I think we may see some
extension if things collapsed uh for one
reason or the other or U the Israeli
site particularly saw uh more
opportunities in terms of the amount of
ISR the intelligence surveillance and
reconnaissance they have the their
positioning their defensive positioning
if they saw more opportunity there to
probably destroy and degrade Hamas I
think they they may take this uh
opportunity uh for the Hamas side I
think it's it's probably the the idea of
prolonging the truth is very useful uh
for them uh on one end but also the idea
of reducing the uh the number of uh of
hostages taken I think also uh will help
them in a in a way so overall it's
interesting because they they agree on
two things on on uh releasing some of
the hostages at least and continuing War
afterwards Omar sh thank you very much
we'll talk to you again throughout the
afternoon next